# NAMprecip

Author:
  Ellen May Jorgensen
  
**Using Canonical Correlation Analysis to Relate Pacific Warming to Integrated Vapor Transport**
Ellen May Jorgensen, _Syracuse University_
December 16, 2022

**Introduction**
 Changes to precipitation as a result of a warming climate are difficult to characterize globally, as different precipitation systems are controlled by different mechanisms. The American Southwest’s annual precipitation is dominated by the North American monsoon, receiving 70% of its annual precipitation during the summer. Throughout most of the year, this region is extremely dry. ​​The monsoon system delivers extreme precipitation events throughout July, August, and September. When these extreme precipitation events occur after months of aridity, extreme erosion leads to mudslides and other hazards. Slot canyons in the American Southwest are flushed with run off and create dangerous flash flood events that can carry away vegetation and even people. The American Southwest has adapted to rely on these extreme oscillations in precipitation and the region relies on summer months to fill reservoirs and provide water resources for the rest of the year. Low-level moisture in the North American Monsoon is fed by cold water from the Gulf of California. Warm upper-level moisture is sourced from the Gulf of Mexico. Lower-level moisture from the Gulf of California is pushed up by the Sierra Madre Occidental in northwestern Mexico to rise to mid to high-level altitudes, where it mixes with moisture from the Gulf of Mexico and redistributes as precipitation over the American Southwest. The system is strongest in the foothills of the Sierra Madre, but moves North until it falters against cold California water and atmospheric subsidence. The system trails off in Arizona, Colorado, and New Mexico, and rainfall in these areas is more variable (Adams & Comrie, 1997).
 
Pascale et al. (2017) postulate that increased sea surface temperatures will weaken convection as the climate system stabilizes. The North American Monsoon relies on convection of cold input from the Gulf of California and warm input from the Gulf of Mexico in order to occur. A change to this system would be devastating to the American Southwest, which relies on summer rainfall for annual water resources. In this study, Pascale et al. find a significant reduction in summer rainfall under a doubling of atmospheric carbon dioxide (Pascale et al., 2017).
Bhattacharya et al. (2018) identify the future of the North American Monsoon as unsure and understudied. Climate models disagree on the strength of late summer rains and therefore disagree on the net change to the monsoon system under warming conditions. In their study, they use leaf wax data from the Last Glacial Period to assess the relationship between sea surface temperature changes and monsoon activity. They find a significant decrease in annual rainfall during deglaciation and find evidence of a threshold of sea surface temperature in the Gulf of California necessary to sustain the North American Monsoon. While this study involves a transition from cold to relatively warm conditions, it brings into question the effect of warming on the system and whether there might be a similar limiting maximum temperature at which the monsoon system is no longer sustained (Bhattacharya et al., 2018).

Bhattacharya et al. (2022) study changes to the North American Monsoon during the mid-Pliocene, a period of similar atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations to what we project for our future, and a helpful time to look for clues about a warmer future. While other studies (such as Pascale, et al. 2017) find that the North American Monsoon will weaken, this study provides paleoclimate proxy data from the mid-Pliocene that shows an increase in summer precipitation under warmer global conditions. They also employ isotope-enabled models (iCESM1.2) of the atmosphere in six different sea surface temperature patterns. Their study suggests that the North American Monsoon expanded and intensified under these conditions. However, their conclusion is that this increase is not necessarily due to the magnitude of warming as much as it is the gradient of sea surface temperatures between the subtropical Pacific and the tropical Pacific.

Frölicher and Laufkötter (2018) find a reduction of sea surface temperature gradient more likely in the future. They study the impacts and future of marine heatwaves in the Pacific Ocean. These heat waves last for days to months, usually in the summer. Marine heat waves of the last two decades have demonstrated SST anomalies of 3-5°C compared to historical conditions (Frölicher & Laufkötter, 2018).
 
In this study, we investigate the relationship between the six warming patterns of the Pacific Ocean used and integrated vapor transport used by Bhattacharya, et. al (2022). These warming scenarios compare two uniform warming conditions as well as four warming conditions that alter the gradient of sea surface temperature in the Pacific. In this study, we use canonical correlation analysis. Integrated vapor transport is a measure of the amount of water vapor moving through a vertical parcel of the atmosphere. This metric allows us to assess the change that various warming events may have on the input of cold lower-level moisture to the monsoon system.

**Data and Methods**

The data used for this study is sourced from model outputs of the isotope enabled Community Earth System Model 1.2 (iCESM1.2) in atmosphere-only mode (iCAM5) run by Bhattacharya, et al. 2022. Atmosphere-only mode accepts sea surface temperature (SST) values as inputs, but does not interact with the ocean beyond that. This model is run at 0.9ºX1.25º horizontal resolution with 30 vertical layers for 40 years with the last 20 years averaged. The simulations used in this study are run with Pliocene-level CO2 concentrations at 400 ppm with preindustrial boundary conditions (Bhattacharya et al, 2022).

Six simulations were run with varying SST patterns. Two increase SST uniformly across the eastern Pacific with no changes to the subtropical/tropical gradient. One was run with 1ºC and another with 2ºC of warming. Four other simulations introduce a marine heat wave off of the coast of California based on the SST values of a marine heatwave in the Pacific from 2014. These were run at 1x, 2x, 3x, and 4x the values recorded for that marine heatwave, reducing the subtropical/tropical gradient through this warming (Bhattacharya et al, 2022).

The post processing code written by Ran Feng, an author on the paper that uses the original model outputs, is used in this study to transform raw model outputs to workable data. This model has far more outputs than we examine in this study. Specifically, we are interested in “TS”, surface temperature, and “IVT”, integrated vapor transport (IVT). In this study, we focus primarily on the Pacific Ocean, so our surface temperature is almost entirely SST.

In this study we aim to assess how these forms of SST variation in these iCAM5 model affect IVT through the months July through September (the summer monsoon season in the American Southwest). We use canonical correlation analysis (CCA) in order to isolate regions that demonstrate strong correlation between SST and IVT. Canonical correlation creates linear combinations of the variables of each dataset and pairs of variables from each dataset so that datasets may be compared with one another. This analysis defines variables that have the largest possible correlation between the two datasets (Korstanje, 2021). We use CCA on two three-dimensional matrices (IVT and SST over the same geographic region) that have one dimension in common so that we may overlap variability. We crop our study area to the subtropical and tropical Pacific Ocean as well as Southwestern North America using a bounding box with a minimum and maximum latitudes of -30, 60 and longitudes of 120, 270. We run CCA for that region compared to six different model simulations. We use canonical correlation analysis to identify areas of high correlation of IVT and SST. In order to validate the results of the cluster correlation analysis, we use internal cluster validation which assesses the compactness of clustered values and the separation of sets of clusters from one another. The silhouette coefficient is an indicator of how well variables are clustered within the analysis. This is based on dissimilarity of points in relation to a cluster.

We originally planned to include a comparison between SST and IVT as well as SST and geopotential height, but we were unable to sufficiently process the data for geopotential height for this study. This might be an interesting line of questioning for future research.

**Results**

We find that over the western Pacific and over Northern Mexico and Southwestern America, IVT changes extremely variably as conditions warm. Figure 1 shows uniform SST increase of 1°C from preindustrial conditions as well as 2°C. These two patterns have almost entirely opposite effects. Our analysis shows that the first scenario increases IVT over the Pacific coast as well as the region of North American Monsoon impact. The effects of the North American Monsoon are shown clearly in the first scenario by a strong positive signal in the American Southwest. Our second scenario of 2°C warming indicates a complete reversal with negative values over the western tropical Pacific and American Pacific coast and a strong negative signal over the track of monsoon’s track.

However, in accordance with the results of Bhattacharya et al. (2022), we also investigated the effect of four marine heatwave simulations, which represent a reduction in the tropical and subtropical Pacific SST gradient. Our Results show a negative signal of IVT associated with a marine heat wave of the magnitude of the one that occurred in 2014. However, the pattern of this anomaly is slightly different than that of the uniform warming scenarios, in that the strongest signal is focussed over the Pacific Northwest, quite far from the track of the North American Monsoon. There is a strong negative signal directly over the foothills of the Sierra Madre Occidental, but the signal becomes slightly positive over the American Southwest. This indicates perhaps little change in the net output of the monsoon system, but change in the geographical distribution of available water vapor.

The second marine heatwave has a starkly different pattern with a strong positive signal over the Pacific Northwest. This positive signal extends across California and into the American Southwest. This positive signal strengthens over the American Southwest in our third marine heatwave simulation. However, parts of the tropical Pacific become less positive. In our fourth marine heatwave scenario, we again see a reversal to negative IVT anomaly over the region of the North American Monsoon. While this negative signal is less consistent than what we see in marine heatwave one, the reversal back to negative conditions indicates another threshold in 

**Discussion**

Our uniform warming scenarios suggest a correlation between increased Pacific SST and a weaker North American Monsoon. However, this interpretation is limited by the number of universal warming scenarios we have. It might be true that a similar signal reversal as seen in our marine heatwave scenarios could occur at a certain threshold of uniform warming.

Our first marine heatwave scenario indicates little change in the net output of the monsoon system, but change in the geographical distribution of available water vapor. We notice a strong negative signal over the foothills of the Sierra Madre Occidental, a region that receives most of its annual precipitation from the North American Monsoon. Such a drastic change would be devastating to local water resources. We also notice an increase in IVT over the American Southwest. This result is interesting, as the monsoon forms over the Sierra Madre Occidental. Further research might investigate the changes to the system if IVT is drastically decreased over the monsoons site of formation and whether the increase we see in Southwest IVT is realistic or if the monsoon system would halt. Our second marine heatwave simulation shows a reversal in signal, with strong positive anomaly values across the American West. This indicates a threshold of the reduction of the Pacific temperature gradient that might allow for an increase in IVT. Our third scenario is similarly positive, but less extremely. Our four simulation interestingly indicates another reversal, where IVT patterns become negative over the American West once again. This is indicative of another threshold of warming and reduction of the Pacific temperature gradient that might reduce that monsoon’s capacity to deliver precipitation.

Further research might also include a comparison to the correlation between geopotential height and SST. The monsoon system relies on movement over the Sierra Madre Occidental to force convection and cause precipitation.

**Conclusion**

In this study, we sought to investigate the changes to integrated vapor transport under various conditions of Pacific warming. More specifically, we were interested in the potential for change to the North American Monsoon system in a warming world. Bhattacharya, et al. 2022 indicate that the magnitude of sea surface temperature change might not be as significant as the change to the Pacific subtropical and tropical temperature gradient. Frölicher and Laufkötter (2018) identify marine heat waves as an ecological risk of increasing likelihood, with the case of the 2014 marine heatwave as an example. We use the outputs of the isotope-enabled Community Earth Systems Model 1.2 (iCESM1.2) in atmosphere-only mode (iCAM5) run by Bhattacharya et al. (2022) to investigate six SST scenarios and their effects on IVT. We use two uniform warming scenarios, one of 1°C and another of 2°C. We then investigate four simulations of marine heatwave conditions which decrease the Pacific temperature gradient. These are based on the conditions of the 2014 marine heatwave and include 1x, 2x, 3x, and 4x those observed warming conditions. We use canonical correlation analysis to find linear correlation between IVT and SST for each of the six scenarios.

Through our analysis, we found that warming itself does not consistently change the signal of IVT over the Pacific and American Southwest. Instead, both uniform and marine heatwave conditions indicate that there are thresholds of temperature that indicate a strengthening or weakening of the monsoon system. Our 1°C uniform warming indicates weakening, while our 2°C indicates strengthening. In our marine heatwave simulations, 1x the 2014 heatwave indicates a negative IVT anomaly while 2x and 3x indicate a positive anomaly. The negative anomaly returns in our 4x scenario.

**References**

Adams, D., & Comrie, A. (1997). The North American Monsoon. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society, 78, 2197–2213. https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0477(1997)078<2197:TNAM>2.0.CO;2
Bhattacharya, T., Feng, R., Tierney, J. E., Rubbelke, C., Burls, N., Knapp, S., & Fu, M. (2022). Expansion and Intensification of the North American Monsoon During the Pliocene. AGU Advances, 3(6), e2022AV000757. https://doi.org/10.1029/2022AV000757
Bhattacharya, T., Tierney, J. E., Addison, J. A., & Murray, J. W. (2018). Ice-sheet modulation of deglacial North American monsoon intensification. Nature Geoscience, 11(11), Article 11. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-018-0220-7
Chonghua, Y. (2018). Identify Patterns in the Coupled Fields of SLP and SST through Canonical Correlation Analysis. https://github.com/royalosyin/Python-Practical-Application-on-Climate-Variability-Studies/blob/master/ex29-Identify%20Patterns%20in%20the%20Coupled%20Fields%20of%20SLP%20and%20SST%20through%20Canonical%20Correlation%20Analysis.ipynb
Frölicher, T. L., & Laufkötter, C. (2018). Emerging risks from marine heat waves. Nature Communications, 9(1), Article 1. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-03163-6
Korstanje, J. (2021, July 8). Canonical Correlation Analysis. Medium. https://towardsdatascience.com/canonical-correlation-analysis-b1a38847219d
Pandey, G. R., Cayan, D. R., & Georgakakos, K. P. (1999). Precipitation structure in the Sierra Nevada of California during winter. Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 104(D10), 12019–12030. https://doi.org/10.1029/1999JD900103
Pascale, S., Boos, W. R., Bordoni, S., Delworth, T. L., Kapnick, S. B., Murakami, H., Vecchi, G. A., & Zhang, W. (2017). Weakening of the North American monsoon with global warming. Nature Climate Change, 7(11), Article 11. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate3412
